Sujets et problématiques des articles

Flandreau-TiesDivideNetwork-2005
ing order: Can we map the geography in the international monetary system?; Can we explain it?;
 and Does it matter? This article deals solely with the first question, in
 the context of the late-nineteenth-century international monetary sys-
 tem

  This article started from the premise that any country's adjustment
 mechanism depends heavily on the degree of the international circula-
 tion of its currency. We identified an indicator of international liquidity,
 captured by a dichotomous variable reflecting the existence of direc-
 tional relations between countries' financial markets. Such variables are
 amenable to modem network analysis techniques, and we provided a
 procedure for automatically identifying "core" and "peripheral" nations
 around 1890-1910.
 This procedure yielded a striking result. The monetary order of the
 late nineteenth century is best described as having been made up of at
 least three groups, rather than the two groups generally referred to. Spe-
 cifically, we found, between Peter Lindert's "key currencies" (pound
 sterling, franc, and mark), and the currencies in Alec Ford's "periphery"
 (the Argentine peso being the archetype), a middle class, mostly made
 up of the currencies of European nations, but through which the United
 States dollar passed on its way to the top. Alternatively, if only two
 groups are to be identified, then we are bound to call "core" nations a
 much broader group than is conventionally considered. Most strikingly,
  such countries as Italy, Russia, Spain, or Austria-Hungary were defi-
 nitely not peripheral. Their currencies enjoyed a regional circulation and
 were known to bankers in a number of leading European centers.
 We hope that these findings will provide a firmer basis for future em-
 pirical work seeking to contrast economic performances in alternative
 groups of countries. The classifications reported in Table 5 can motivate
 more rigorously the use of separate regressions for different groups.
 Similarly, the indices of centrality that we constructed can be used as
 controls of the influence of centrality in econometric work. For the con-
 venience of future research, the readers can find in Appendix Table 1
 two brands of monetary geography indices.
 Future research will need to explain the emergence of the structure
 we identified, and to measure carefully how much it did matter. The
 first question is Terra Incognita. On the second issue, research is also
 needed, but there is already evidence that the structure identified did
 matter. For instance, we know that "core" and "intermediate" countries
 were able to circulate debts denominated in their own currency on for-
 eign markets, whereas members of the periphery were not.33 Similarly,
 recent research has reported evidence of a greater contribution of ex-
 change rate movements to external adjustments in countries belonging
 to our "periphery"-unsurprisingly given that they could not borrow so
 easily abroad.34 More work is needed to go beyond these general re-
 marks. But we believe our findings might open new perspectives. These
 perspectives should, at the very least, have the potential to free us from
 the conventional reference, when it comes to explaining the pre-1914
 international monetary order, to those famous "rules of the game" of
 which it is only known that t they never existed.


Flandreau-EmpiricsOfInternationalCurrencies-2009
These theories have three distinct features: they suggest that the emergence
of international currencies is predicated on the existence of transaction costs; they
emphasise the role of strategic externalities and they usually predict strong persistence
in monetary leadership. Our aim is to provide new evidence on the empirical validity of
these insights.

Idées de problématique :
- À quel groupe appartiennent les colonies (key, intermediary, periphery)
- Est-ce que les colonies sont plus ou moins connectés aux autres pays par 
rapport aux autres pays des groupes intermediary ou de la périphérie ?
- Comment évolue la densité, la polarisation des échanges/marchés de devises au cours des trois années ?
- Est-ce que la diminution du PIB des pays au cours des années 1890-1910 est liée à son nombre de colonies, 
à ses caractéristiques locales dans le graphe des marchés de devise et dans le graphe des échanges bilatéraux ?

Benja : 
- je pense que les deux premières prolématiques sont les plus adaptées au cours : relativement simples, mais en même temps pas absolument évidentes. On peut les fusionner facilemet pour faire un truc genre : la place des pays anciennement colonisés dans le système monétaire mondial entre 1890 et 1910. Puis des sous-parties :
  - revue litté & présentation problème
  - mise en évidence des trois groupes de pays & retrouver les conclusions de l'article de 2005
  - les colonies dans ces groupes
  - connexions des collonies aux pays intermédiaires (qq indicateurs vus en cours)
  - conclusions & perspectives
